The Lazy Man's Guide to Enlightenment by Thaddeus Golas 

I am a lazy man. Laziness keeps me from believing that enlightenment demands effort, discipline, strict 
diet, non-smoking, and other evidences of virtue. That's about the worst heresy I could propose, but I 
have to be honest before I can be reverent. I am doing the work of writing this book to save myself the 
trouble of talking about it.
There is an odd chance that this is what someone needs to read in order to feel better about himself. If 
you are a kind person and want to know what to expect when enlightenment strikes and why it comes 
to you, with or without psychedelic help, this is for you.
These are the rules of the game as I see them. I realize that many of us are opening up very fast these 
days, and one of the most common delusions we face is the belief that our sense of revelation is unique. 
The feeling of knowing the truth is not enough. My intention is not to pretend final truth, but to suggest 
certain simple attitudes that will work for anybody and stay with you in the most extreme freak-out or 
space-out, even when your mind is completely blown. These attitudes are so simple that I'm 
surrounding them with a picture of the universe to show why they work even when you don't believe 
they will.
The universe is so vast and complex that if we needed books like this to become enlightened, we'd 
never make it. But on the other hand the universe is so simple in design that there's no reason for 
anyone to be puzzled or unhappy. It's easy to control your existence, no matter how complicated it 
looks. I've abandoned the idea of writing this a number of times, on the ground that people didn't know 
it because they didn't want to. But in the end there is no more reason for not writing it than there is for 
writing it.
I am writing what I will want to read someday when I am stuck in a weird place. Several times on 
bummers I've thought: What could I say to someone in this state of mind that would mean anything? 
That's the kind of testing this information has had. There isn't a line in this book that is there just 
because it sounds beautiful. The information is practical and reliable. It has taken me and others safely 
through some extreme states of mind, and can be reduced to a few phrases that are simple enough to 
recall in any crisis.
The first chapter begins with a briefly stated idea about how the universe is made, and the rest of the 
book discusses our lives from that viewpoint. It is a far-reaching idea, extending into every field of 
knowledge, and since it took me many years to get it straight, I cannot expect that anyone else should 
casually accept it. All I can do is ask that you play the idea game, see where it leads, and check it out 
against what you know. What has to be true for the universe to look to us as it does? Is there a credible 
bridge between matter and spirit? Like many people, I wrestled with such concerns for years, and this 
book contains some of the conclusions. Perhaps these conclusions will be meaningful to you only if 
you follow your own process of checking and proving. If so, the first chapter contains all you will need 
to keep you busy for a long time. On the other hand, if all you want is a handy trip guide, you'll find 
that, too.
I'm really not expecting anyone to take these sentences and expand them again into a feeling of 
realization. But if one of you whom I never hear about gets a little higher and happier, then I would 
write all this again a thousand times over. I hope you find the vibrations pleasant.
Who are we?
We are equal beings and the universe is our relations with each other. The universe is made of one kind 
of entity: each one is alive, each determines the course of his own existence.
That is really all you need to know to understand this book or write your own. Everything I say has its 
roots in that first paragraph, and it is possible to resolve any question by going back to it and thinking it 
through for yourself.
The universe is made of one kind of whatever-it-is, which cannot be defined. For our purpose, it isn't 
necessary to try to define it. All we need to do is assume that there is only one kind of whatever-it-is, 
and see if it leads to a reasonable explanation for the world as we know it.
The basic function of each being is expanding and contracting. Expanded beings are permeative; 
contracted beings are dense and impermeative. Therefore each of us, alone or in combination, may 
appear as space, energy, or mass, depending on the ratio of expansion to contraction chosen, and what 
kind of vibrations each of us expresses by alternating expansion and contraction. Each being controls 
his own vibrations.
A completely expanded being is space. Since expansion is permeative, we can be in the "same space" 
with one or more other expanded beings. In fact, it is possible for all the entities in the universe to be 
one space.
We experience expansion as awareness, comprehension, understanding, or whatever we wish to call it. 
When we are completely expanded, we have a feeling of total awareness, of being one with all life. At 
that level we have no resistance to any vibrations or interactions of other beings. It is timeless bliss, 
with unlimited choice of consciousness, perception, and feeling.
Space is a level of experience that any of us can reach, but it is difficult to talk about on our present 
plane precisely because it is unlimited. It is that which chooses limits and makes definitions. We might 
say: all experiences are available to the One Mind, and the One Mind is all of us or any of us at the 
highest level of expansion. Or we might theorize: God could not create anything more limited than 
Himself that would persist, but if He duplicates Himself, He can enjoy a persistent universe. Each 
entity, therefore, is a duplicate of God, "made in His image."
It doesn't matter what words we use: we exist and the universe exists, and it is possible to test this 
expansion-contraction idea within the limited scope of what is real to us as human beings, especially in 
atomic and sub-atomic studies.
When a being is totally contracted, he is a mass particle, completely imploded. To the degree that he is 
contracted, a being is unable to be in the same space with others, so contraction is felt as fear, pain, 
unconsciousness, ignorance, hatred, evil, and a whole host of strange feelings. At an extreme he has the 
feeling of being completely insane, of resisting everyone and everything, of being unable to choose the 
content of his consciousness. Of course, these are just the feelings appropriate to mass vibration levels, 
and he can get out of them at any time by expanding, by letting go of all resistance to what he thinks, 
sees, or feels.
When a being is alternating expansion and contraction, he is energy. My guess is that at the middle 
point, fifty percent expansion and fifty percent contraction, a being would be logical, non-subjective, 
egoless, and predictable. This may be the "zero" which is one side of energy equations in physics, as 
well as the "ego-death" we go through in expanding to higher levels of awareness.
It is important to note that energy is not a quantity of anything "objective." Energy, like space and 
